Gatescarth Pass
Discover more
Background
4x4's and motorcycles
Horseriders and bikes
Map and guidelines
Applying and permit dates
Donation
Contact
Home
Explore
Plan your visit
Rights of way and access
Unsealed roads
Gatescarth Pass
Background
The Byway Open to All Traffic (BOAT) running between Sadgill and Mardale (known as Gatescarth Pass) is closed to public mechanically propelled vehicular traffic other than on specific permit days.
The information below will help you apply for a permit and explains the various prohibitions and requirements.
The permit system applies to all motorcyclists and 4×4 drivers. The pass is open for vehicles one day a month.
4x4's and motorcycles
Use of Gatescarth Pass by motor vehicles is regulated by Traffic Regulation Order (TRO) in accordance with The Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984. Contravention of a TRO is a motoring offence punishable by fine and/or penalty points.
Gatescarth Pass is open one day per month to users of recreational motor vehicles issued with an authorising permit by the Lake District National Park Authority (subject to conditions outlined). Permit days are the first Friday, Saturday or Sunday of each month.
To reduce damage on the track 4×4’s can only proceed North to South.
For 4x4s and quad bikes the permit allows one pass of the route in one direction only – North to South.
Motorcyclists can return over the Pass if they wish and can start from either the North or the South side. Please be aware vehicles may be coming in the opposite direction; give way as necessary, particularly if they are ascending.
A maximum of 12 4x4s or quad bikes (in groups of two, three or four vehicles) will be permitted on any one permit day.
A maximum of 18 motorcycles (in groups of two, three four, five or six vehicles) will be allowed on each permit day.
Users are not allowed to use the Pass as a single user, they must be part of a group of at least 2 motorcycles or 2 4x4s.
4×4 vehicles are not permitted from December-March inclusive each year to safeguard the most vulnerable sections of the Pass from disturbance.
Sections of Gatescarth Pass have a fragile and vulnerable surface that is very difficult to maintain. If use is to continue, riders and drivers must use it with great respect and care. You must read the Lake District National Park driver and rider guidance before applying for a permit. It will be the responsibility of the applicant to ensure all the riders/drivers in his/her group read the Driver and Rider Guidance before the permit day.
4×4 vehicles with a wheelbase of 100 inch+ are not permitted to drive the Pass because of damage caused by larger 4 x 4s.
Please read Driver and Rider Guidance for information. You will be refused access on permit day if your vehicle does not meet these requirements. It is each permit holder’s responsibility to prove and ensure that their vehicle falls within the wheelbase limits, that their vehicle is suitably equipped for the conditions to be encountered on the route, and that all persons listed on the permit know the Driver and Rider Guidance.
In the event of bad weather and poor ground conditions, permit days will be cancelled. Any decision to cancel will be based on the series of monthly inspections of route condition, previous weather conditions and weather forecasts. Information will be posted on this web page and/or sent by email to permit holders.
The ultimate responsibility to check if the permit is valid and the permit day is to go ahead, lies with the permit holder.
The gate-lock combination number issued to permit holders will apply from 9am to 4pm on the permit day.
It is the permit holder’s responsibility to lock the gate behind them. All users should be off the route by 4pm at the latest.
The gate-lock combination number will be changed after 4pm. 4×4 users and quad bikes must be at the locked gate on the Mardale side no later than 1pm.
Access will not be allowed after this time.
Horseriders and mountain bikes
Update August 2025 – The previous kissing gates on either side of the Pass have now been replaced with bridle gates on an open-ended trial basis, removing the need for horse riders to obtain a permit and the gate code for the wider locked gates.
The Traffic Regulation Order (TRO) remains in effect over the Pass (link above). We now therefore permit all horseriders to proceed over the section of the Byway affected by the Order until further notice. Use of the section of the byway subject to the TRO by mechanically propelled and horse drawn vehicles without a permit remains an offence.
Mountain bikers can use the Pass at any time.
Please look at
Gatescarth Pass TRO Map
Gatescarth Pass TRO (PDF)
Gatescarth Pass vehicular route map (PDF)
page
Gatescarth Pass user guidelines (page)
What's new
Gatescarth Pass – closed for 4×4 Vehicles
Following a recent assessment of the bridge over Gatescarth Beck (located immediately beyond Mardale Head Car Park onto Gatescarth Pass), it has been determined that crossing this bridge is currently unsafe for 4×4 vehicles.
Permit days will continue for motorcycles, and the route remains open to horse-riders, walkers, and cyclists. These users may access the wicket gate adjacent to the field gate at any time.
We are actively collaborating with user groups and aim to replace the bridge as soon as feasible. We apologise for any inconvenience this may cause.
Further updates regarding the installation of a replacement bridge will be published on the Gatescarth Pass website when available.
How to apply
Please ensure you have read all the information below before applying
Applicants MUST provide details of all permit holders in the permit application forms – names, addresses and registration numbers. We may refuse applications which do not have the correct information.
Details of what information we hold and why can be found in our Privacy Notice or upon request.
Important: The permit holder must ensure that all drivers and riders named on the permit have read and understood the Lake District National Park driver and rider guidance.
Individual applicants will normally be issued only one permit in any calendar year. If demand is low and not all permits or numbers are filled, this could be increased. Once you apply for a permit your application will be assessed and you will be notified when it has been approved.
To apply, see below.
2026 permit dates
Motorcycles only
Saturday 10 January
Sunday 08 February
Friday 06 March
Saturday 11 April
Sunday 10 May
Friday 05 June
Saturday 04 July
Sunday 09 August
Friday 04 September
Saturday 10 October
Sunday 08 November
Friday 04 December
Apply for a Gatescarth Pass permit
Use our application forms to apply for a 4x4 or motorcycle permit, check dates and availability.
Gatescarth Pass permits
What to do once you have received your permit
On the Thursday before a permit day permit holders must phone the Lake District National Park Authority Contact Centre on 01539 724555 to be given the combination code for the gate locks, if you have any problems contacting the Contact Centre please ring Suzy Hankin on 07799 075114 .
The codes will apply from 9am to 4pm on the permit days. Permit holders will be permitted to lock and unlock the gates themselves. Our staff will continue to carry out patrols. Permit holders must not share lock codes with others nor invite other users to join their permitted groups.
This system has been developed and agreed by the Gatescarth Pass Working Group. It consists of National Park Authority staff and representatives from motorcycle and 4 x 4 groups, Cumbria Bridleways Society and Friends of the Lake District. Any changes to this system will be recommended by the Group. Contravention of a TRO is a motoring offence punishable by fine and / or penalty points.
How you can help
Running the permit scheme comes at a cost, both in administration, volunteer time to marshal the event, checking of the route following permit days and ongoing maintenance costs, which can often be considerable. If you feel you would like to make a one-off donation to help support us in running the scheme and maintaining this route for others to enjoy in the future, please click on the link below.
Everything really does help. Thank you.
Gatescarth Pass donations
For further information
Contact: Mandy Fleming-Williams
Telephone: 01768 871400
Email: pmadminsouth@lakedistrict.gov.uk
Address:
Lake District National Park Authority
Northern Office
Old Station Yard
Threlkeld
Keswick CA12 4TT
