Current Traffic Regulation Orders and Notices
Home
Explore
Plan your visit
Rights of way and access
Temporary closures of rights of way
Current Traffic Regulation Orders and Notices
Westmorland and Furness Council Closure of Footpath 543030, Chapel Stile, Lakes (Langdales) Parish
Date of change: 23 September 2026
Westmorland and Furness Council have issued a second Notice continuing the temporary closure of part of footpath 543030 between Chapel Stile and the Baysbrown campsite. The closure is due to the likelihood of danger to the public, there appears a possibility that a retaining wall between the B5343 road and footpath 543030 could collapse (the wall sits beside the footpath and supports material which may otherwise fall across it).
The closure notice will expire on 16 October 2026, an order may be made continuing the closure beyond this date.
An alternative route has been made available passing through gaps created in the wall to get off the access track and pass through a short section of the field.
Second Temporary Closure Notice for Footpath 543030 issued by Council (PDF)
Crag Cottage bridge, over main drain near Meathop, Footpath 582005, Meathop and Ulpha Parish
Date of change: 14 September 2026
We have converted from a Notice to an Order a temporary closure of the footbridge over the main drain near Crag Cottage, which has been found to have significant structural issues and deemed unsafe for use. Elements of the steelwork have cracked or failed, and there is bulging of the concrete parts of the structure.
We will be working with the Environment Agency (who maintain this bridge) to replace / reinstate a crossing over the main drain as soon as possible, but it may take some time to progress a replacement of the bridge or permanent diversion of the footpath.
There is currently no alternative route available – but an option for this is being looked into. The Order may remain in force for up to 6 months (or until the likelihood of danger has been removed). The Order may also be extended by the Secretary of State if the likelihood of danger remains at the end of this period.
Made Order, Notice & Plan (PDF)
Expiry date: 14 March 2027
Bridge over Great Langdale Beck near Oak Howe, Bridleway 543049, Lakes (Langdales) Parish
Date of change: 18 June 2026
We have converted from a Notice to an Order a temporary restriction on the use of the bridleway bridge over Great Langdale Beck near Oak Howe to walkers only. One of the bridge beams has begun to sag and to mitigate the likelihood of danger the bridge is temporarily closed to horse riders, users with mobility equipment and cyclists to reduce the likelihood of the bridge beam failing.
The bridge has been assessed by an engineer who has confirmed that this restriction should remain in place and provided suggestions around remedial works which could add a limited amount to the lifespan of the bridge. The bridge will continue to be monitored with fixed point measurements monthly to determine any further movement. We will be seeking funding for the replacement of the bridge as soon as possible.
Unfortunately there is no suitable nearby crossing over the river, so the only alternative is using other rights of way or public highways and affected users altering their route accordingly.
The Order may remain in force for up to 6 months (or until the likelihood of danger has been removed). The Order may also be extended by the Secretary of State if the likelihood of danger remains at the end of this period. Unfortunately it is unlikely we will be able to identify a source of funding, obtain any necessary consents and carry out the replacement of this bridge this year.
Made Order Oak Howe (PDF)
Expiry date: 18 December 2026
Thornthwaite Forest and Beckstones Gill, Bridleway and Footpath 201006 and 201044, Above Derwent Parish
Date of change: 6 May 2026
We have made an Order for the temporary closure of sections of bridleway 201006 (Thornthwaite Forest – between points A-B-C-D on the plan) and footpath 201044 (Beckstones Gill – between points H and G on the plan) at Whinlatter. The Order will enable forestry thinning works to be undertaken safely and efficiently.
The works are anticipated to commence from 11 May 2026 and the Order will be in effect for up to six months, it is anticipated that the works requiring closure of the bridleway within this period will take around four months and that the works affecting the footpath will take around three weeks. The Order may also be extended with the authorisation of the Secretary of State if the works are not complete within the six month period.
At some times during the works the full extent of the closure on bridleway 201006 will be in effect and there will be no suitable alternative. When works are only taking place towards the western end of the bridleway closure, a route via points D-C-E-F will be made available, when works are only taking place towards the eastern end of the closure, a route via points A-B-E-F will be available. Signage will be erected to indicate the current situation throughout the works. Whilst the closure is in effect on footpath 201044 the easiest to use (though very long) alternative is shown on the Order plan using forest tracks and other established paths via Seat How, Ullister Hill and Lord’s Seat, points G-N-M-L-K-J on the plan. Forestry England are the relevant Access Authority for this land and will also be issuing a direction (restriction) on open access during the works.
Web Copy_TTRO Thornthwaite Forest & Beckstones Gill MADE ORDER (PDF)
Staveley Waste Water Treatment Works, Footpath 561001, Over Staveley Parish
Date of change: 28 April 2026
We have made an Order temporarily closing a section of footpath 561001 to enable works to install a new sewage pipeline between Staveley Waste Water Treatment Works and the village and carry out upgrades at the treatment works, as shown between points A and B on the site notice plan.
The order will take effect on 11 May 2026 and the works are anticipated to take around 12 months. It is therefore highly likely we will seek authorisation from the Secretary of State for an extension of the Order beyond its initial 6 month duration.
An alternative route will be made available (depicted between points A, C and D on the plan) passing through adjacent fields and meeting the road to the northwest of the footpath.
Expires: 11 November 2026
Staveley WWTW TTRO_Made Order & Notice_web copy (PDF)
Various footpaths and bridleways affected by west coast pylon re-cabling, Bootle, Drigg and Carleton, Muncaster, Waberthwaite and Whicham Parishes
Date of change: 17 September 2026
The Secretary of State has extended the Order temporarily closing public rights of way which are beneath or in close proximity to power lines whilst works are undertaken to install new cables on pylons on the west coast as part of Electricity North West’s Cumbria Ring project to upgrade the electricity network in the area. Further details regarding this project are available on ENW’s website here (external link): £56m Roosecote to Sellafield overhead line refurbishment. During the works the new cables must be considered hazardous until they are fully tensioned, along with use of heavy machinery obstructing the paths. The works are being completed in phases – individual paths only being closed whilst works are taking place on each section, and closures of individual paths may vary from one to three months.
The Order has been extended until 14 April 2027 or until the works are complete, if earlier. It is anticipated that the works affecting paths within the National Park will be completed by mid- February 2027 (these will run generally south to north, though the most southerly section of the works will take place after the rest). The Order may be extended by the Secretary of State if the works have not been completed within a six month period – but it is not expected that this will be necessary. During the closures unfortunately there are not suitable direct alternative routes to the closed rights of way.
We will continue to update the information on this closure with the paths currently affected as the project progresses.
Update 11 September 2026 – Works affecting Bridleway 405018 (Bell Hill Farm) and Footpath 405004 (Holme Bridge) have now commenced and these routes are now closed.
Works affecting Footpaths 429019 and 418008, and Bridleways 428022 and 418029 are now complete and these paths are back open (plans 4 and 5 – between Ravenglass and Eskmeals / Waberthwaite).
Secretary of State Extension Letter, Notice, Order and Plans – TTRO West Coast Pylon Re-Cabling (PDF)
Update or remove from website: 14 April 2027
Part of Footpath 511063, St Paul’s Church, Rusland, Colton Parish
Date of change: 9 March 2026
Masonry has fallen from the tower at the western end of St Paul’s Church, Rusland, past which footpath 511063 passes and there appears an ongoing risk that further stonework might fall onto the footpath before repair works can be undertaken to make it stable – posing a likelihood of danger to the public. The Secretary of State has further extended the temporary closure order for the affected section of the footpath until 23 April 2027, or until works to make the church tower safe are complete, whichever is the earlier. The order may be further extended with the authorisation of the Secretary of State. Alternative routes are available passing through the churchyard around the eastern end of the church using the unaffected sections of the footpath and other paths within the churchyard.
Extension Letter, Notice, Order and Plan (PDF)
Expires: 23 April 2027
Part of Footpath 348013, Bannerdale, Mungrisdale Parish
Date of change: 12 July 2025
We have converted a notice closing part of footpath 348013 into an order. The affected section of footpath is alongside the River Glenderamackin between its junction with footpath 348012 and just north-east of Bannerdale Beck (points A and B on the plan). The path has been significantly cut away by riverbank erosion and landslips, and the physical width of the path is now extremely narrow in places. In places there is no safe easy way down to the riverbed, or up and around the hazardous sections.
The best alternative route is shown in green on the plan (B-C), this has been waymarked – other alternatives do exist through the rough ground and bracken. Please take care if using them.
The order will remain in effect for six months, and may be extended by the Secretary of State. We are exploring the options for this footpath as erosion has been a longstanding issue. This may involve creating / repairing a more sustainable path on the current alignment, or considering a diversion of the footpath onto a new route.
TRO – Bannerdale, July 2025 (PDF)
Expires: 17 January 2027
Part of Footpath 539017, Far Houses, Kirkby Ireleth Parish
Date of change: 18 June 2026
The Secretary of State has further extended the Order temporarily closing part of footpath 539017 until 8 November 2026 (or until works affecting the footpath are complete, if earlier). The Order was made to enable Natural England to undertake works to repair the structures at Far Houses, a deserted farmstead, to prevent further deterioration of the built remains and avoid them becoming unsafe. The removal of sycamore trees which were affecting the structures has now been completed. The next phase of the works began in May to consolidate the walls using traditional lime mortar techniques. Natural England now estimate that these remaining works should be completed by the end of September 2026. Lime mortar require a curing period where it should be protected from extreme temperatures, rainfall, sunlight and wind, and so these remaining works will be somewhat dependent on favourable weather conditions. The Secretary of State has therefore granted a four-month extension of the Order to 8 November 2026 (or until the works are complete, if earlier) to allow for any further delays. An alternative route is available through the fields around the western perimeter of the farmstead (shown in green between points A-C-B on the plan).
TTRO 539017, Far Houses, Kirkby Ireleth – Notice, Extension Letter, Order and Map (PDF)
Expires: 8 November 2026
Huck’s Bridge / A6 to Breast High Road, Bridleway 355041, Orton Parish
Date of change: 5 August 2026
The Secretary of State has further extended the Order temporarily closing the bridleway between the A6 at Huck’s Bridge (Low Borrowbridge) and Breast High Road, to 3 September 2027. The route has been affected by landslips, and the riverbank is still deteriorating, and is no longer safe for users on the original line of the bridleway. An alternative route exists adjacent to the closed path for walkers, but for cyclists and horse-riders the only alternative is the Breast High Road byway (ford) – which is sometimes impassable at the ford/stepping stones.
We are exploring the options for a suitable alternative route for the bridleway, or potential to create a bridge beside the byway ford.
TTRO – 355041, Hucks Bridge, Orton – Notice, Order, Map, Extension Letter (PDF)
Expires: 3 September 2027
Newlands Beck – Part of Footpath 201023, Newlands Beck, Little Braithwaite, Above Derwent Parish
Date of change: 2 December 2025
Part of footpath 201023, along the bank of Newlands Beck south of Little Braithwaite (shown A-B in red on the attached plan) is closed to the public because the river washed away the bank and footpath during Storm Ciara (February 2020) with further subsequent damage. The extent of the damage has grown significantly since then.
The Order came into effect on 18 February 2020 and following previous extensions the Secretary of State has now extended this until 30 June 2027. We intend to make a diversion order to resolve this issue. Meanwhile, please use alternative routes following public roads to the east or west and other footpaths, which can be seen on the map.
Case Officer: If you have any queries, please contact Nick Thorne, Senior Rights of Way Officer on 01539 792621 or nick.thorne@lakedistrict.gov.uk
TTRO – 201023, Newland Beck, Above Derwent – Order, Map and Extension Letter (PDF)
Expires: 30 June 2027
